add small spec/documentation for otel distributions (#859)
elastic/apm: specs/agents/otel-distribution.md

Configuration namespace: `ELASTIC_OTEL_INFERRED_SPANS_*`

### System metrics

These metrics are usually captured using the collector running locally but in case where no collector is present, or a centralized
collector is used then the user might opt in to also collect those.

These metrics are not captured by default in order to prevent duplicated metrics when they are also captured by a collector.

TODO : add link to supported platforms and respective implementations
TODO : add the configuration option name to enable those

### Cloud resource attributes

Supported platforms: Java

The cloud resource attributes ([semconv](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/resource/cloud/)) provide equivalent 
attributes to the [cloud provider metadata](metadata.md#cloud-provider-metadata), which are usually provided
through a metadata HTTP(s) endpoint accessible from the application.

Elastic OpenTelemetry distributions SHOULD capture those by default for a better onboarding experience.
Users MUST be able to disable this default to minimize application startup overhead or if those attributes are provided through the collector.

> Elastic distribution MUST allow resource providers to be disabled through explicit configuration by supporting `OTEL_RESOURCE_PROVIDERS_${provider}_ENABLED=false`.

Reviewer: We don't have it in python and I can't find any reference to it on the common environment variables https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/configuration/sdk-environment-variables/, do you have any link?

Author: The implementation is only in the java "autoconfiguration", so it's only implemented for the java agent.

The actual implementation of those providers comes from the contrib repo, and reusing them as-is in an application will enable them by default (due to how auto-configuration works with the SDK). While the implementation here might be very java-specific, the feature is definitely cross-platform, adding a comment that it's java specific for not could help clarify this.

@trentm I remember there are similar providers in the nodejs contrib repo, do you know if there are ways to disable them through configuration, and if yes what is the configuration option ?

Reviewer 2: (Aside on the java envvar:

I see https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/java/automatic/configuration/#enable-resource-providers-that-are-disabled-by-default mentions `otel.resource.providers.aws.enabled` but not the environment variable equivalent.

... oh, you need to hit the "(+)" disclosure to see it, and this is generated by a template at https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/blob/main/content/en/docs/languages/java/automatic/configuration.md#enable-resource-providers-that-are-disabled-by-default   The string `OTEL_RESOURCE_PROVIDERS_` doesn't appear in code anywhere, so my grepping was failing. :)

---

The OTel JS `@opentelemetry/sdk-node` package supports a `export OTEL_NODE_RESOURCE_DETECTORS="env,host"` envvar to limit to a particular set of resource detectors. Documented here:
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/tree/main/experimental/packages/opentelemetry-sdk-node#resourcedetectors
By default this package only includes a few resource detectors -- none of the cloud ones.

The separate `@opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node` package -- which provides the closest thing to zero-code instrumentation for Node.js -- also supports `OTEL_NODE_RESOURCE_DETECTORS` and includes many more detectors by default (including the cloud ones). It also includes "all" and "none" explicit values.
Documented here: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js-contrib/tree/main/metapackages/auto-instrumentations-node/#usage-auto-instrumentation

Author: @xrmx for python I've found a few resource providers but I don't know if they can be enabled/disabled through configuration, the examples below are only registered through explicit code:
- [azure (contrib)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/460fc335836c395db8472ecf464e7ecd94c08925/resource/opentelemetry-resource-detector-azure)
- [aws ec3 (contrib)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/460fc335836c395db8472ecf464e7ecd94c08925/sdk-extension/opentelemetry-sdk-extension-aws#usage-aws-resource-detectors)

So if you know a way to disable them through configuration it would be worth to add a reference to it here.

Author: I've added platform-specific examples in 3cef06fea46167a3856e2f5d4b8b8428eb92a839 here so it's more clear.

This also highlights that there is probably an opportunity to contribute a cross-platform way to do this upstream.

Reviewer: In upstream python we have `OTEL_EXPERIMENTAL_RESOURCE_DETECTORS` that behaves like the js one, have to ask why it's experimental, probably a very old semantic convention

_Vanilla OpenTelemetry Distribution_.

## General guidelines

Those statements are guiding principles of the Elastic OpenTelemetry distributions, they should be considered more as advice than strict rules.

Elastic OpenTelemetry distribution SHOULD ideally:
- behave as drop-in replacements of their upstream counterparts
- provide a simple setup and favor onboarding experience (aka "things should work by default").
- avoid capturing potentially confusing data (see [system metrics](#system-metrics) example below).

## Configuration

Elastic OpenTelemetry distributions MAY override the default configuration.
When doing so, user-configuration should remain consistent with vanilla distribution:
- explicit user configuration SHOULD remain effective
- overriden default configuration MUST have the ability to be restored to upstream default

Elastic specific configuration items MUST be prefixed with `ELASTIC_OTEL_`.
For example, the [inferred spans](#inferred-spans) feature is configured with `ELASTIC_OTEL_INFERRED_SPANS_*`.

Elastic and platform specific configuration items must be prefixed with `ELASTIC_OTEL_${platform}|` to be consistent with

> the upstream `OTEL_${platform}_` prefix.

Reviewer 3: should we add an example here, as we did above for inferred spans?

Author: For now we don't have such platform specific config option, so it's just a reminder that we should try to be consistent with upstream otel options when we can.

Reviewer 3: ok, thanks for the info, I didn't realize we don't currently have an example.

For simplicity the configuration in this specification will use the "environment variable" syntax, some platforms like Java
might also support other ways to configure.

## Features

### Inferred spans

Supported platforms: [Java](https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-java/tree/main/inferred-spans)

> Configuration namespace: `ELASTIC_OTEL_INFERRED_SPANS_*`

Author: There are quite a lot of options in the Java agent, do you mean we should move them all here ? Given we only have one implementation for now those might actually be platform-specific and we are not sure all of them will be cross-platform.

> Configuration namespace: `ELASTIC_OTEL_INFERRED_SPANS_*`

Reviewer 4: I think just not leave it at `*`, ie add a specific example

> Configuration namespace: `ELASTIC_OTEL_INFERRED_SPANS_*`

Author: For now the inferred spans is java-specific, but the configuration is using the global namespace, so it would make sense to fix this inconsistency by moving everything from `ELASTIC_OTEL_INFERRED_SPANS_` to `ELASTIC_OTEL_JAVA_INFERRED_SPANS_`. However after discussing this with @JonasKunz, since we are planning to also contribute this upstream the options are also likely to change again as part of the process.

So here, instead of fixing this inconsistency it's probably simpler to just omit that in the spec and wait until we have contributed this upstream, so if there are config changes we do it only once.

> Configuration namespace: `ELASTIC_OTEL_INFERRED_SPANS_*`

Reviewer: Hopefully the one that enables inferred spans it may be shared :sweat_smile:

> Configuration namespace: `ELASTIC_OTEL_INFERRED_SPANS_*`

Author: I've documented this small inconsistency in 6d9c8ca6456b22af8a9df7fe64bbfe3f277328c9, for simplicity I've only added the "enable" config option for now.

### System metrics

> Those metrics are usually captured using the collector running locally but in case where no collector is present, or a centralized

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These metrics are usually captured using the collector running locally but in case where no collector is present, or a centralized
```

collector is used then the user might opt in to also collect those.

> Those metrics are not captured by default to prevent duplicated metrics when they are also captured by a collector.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These metrics are not captured by default to prevent duplicated metrics when they are also captured by a collector.
```

TODO : add link to supported platforms and respective implementations
TODO : add the configuration option name to enable those

### Cloud resource attributes

Supported platforms: Java

The cloud resource attributes ([semconv](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/resource/cloud/)) provide equivalent 
attributes to the [cloud provider metadata](metadata.md#cloud-provider-metadata), which are usually provided
through a metadata HTTP(s) endpoint accessible from the application.

> Elastic OpenTelemetry distribution SHOULD capture those by default as it helps onboarding experience.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Elastic OpenTelemetry distributions SHOULD capture those by default for a better onboarding experience.
```

Users MUST be able to disable this default to minimize application startup overhead or if those attributes are provided through the collector.

> Elastic distribution MUST extend the `OTEL_RESOURCE_PROVIDERS_${provider}_ENABLED` option to support the `false` value 

Reviewer 4: what do you mean by `extend` here?

Author: The original documentation only covers the "enable explicitly things that are disabled by default" use-case: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/java/automatic/configuration/#enable-resource-providers-that-are-disabled-by-default

However the Java implementation supports having an explicit `false` value in the tests, so maybe rephrasing to something like this would be more appropriate:

```
Elastic distribution MUST disable resource providers through explicit configuration with `OTEL_RESOURCE_PROVIDERS_${provider}_ENABLED=false`
```

Author: Exactly, thanks for understanding what I meant and not what I wrote ! I'll update with your latest suggestion.

- avoid capturing potentially confusing data (see [system metrics](#system-metrics) example below).

## Configuration

Elastic OpenTelemetry distributions MAY override the default configuration.
When doing so, user-configuration should remain consistent with vanilla distribution:
- explicit user configuration SHOULD remain effective
- overriden default configuration MUST have the ability to be restored to upstream default

Elastic specific configuration items MUST be prefixed with `ELASTIC_OTEL_`.
For example, the [universal profiling integration](#universal-profiling-integration) can be enabled with `ELASTIC_OTEL_UNIVERSAL_PROFILING_INTEGRATION_ENABLED`.

Elastic and platform specific configuration items must be prefixed with `ELASTIC_OTEL_${platform}_` to be consistent with
the upstream `OTEL_${platform}_` prefix.

For simplicity the configuration in this specification will use the "environment variable" syntax, some platforms like Java
might also support other ways to configure.

## Features

### Inferred spans

Supported platforms: [Java](https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-java/tree/main/inferred-spans)

Configuration to enable: `ELASTIC_OTEL_INFERRED_SPANS_ENABLED`

> Note: While the implementation is Java-only for now, it should probably have been using `ELASTIC_OTEL_JAVA_INFERRED_SPANS_ENABLED`

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we instead first mention the config option name that should be used (`ELASTIC_OTEL_${platform}_INFERRED_SPANS_ENABLED`) and then put in the note that the current one (`ELASTIC_OTEL_INFERRED_SPANS_ENABLED`) will be updated?

Like 

```
### Inferred spans

Configuration to enable: `ELASTIC_OTEL_${platform}_INFERRED_SPANS_ENABLED`

Supported platforms: [Java](https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-java/tree/main/inferred-spans)

Note: While the implementation is Java-only for now, it currently uses the config option `ELASTIC_OTEL_INFERRED_SPANS_ENABLED `. It should be using `ELASTIC_OTEL_JAVA_INFERRED_SPANS_ENABLED` instead, but we plan to fix this inconsistency once it has been contributed upstream
```

Reviewer: Emily, do you imply that we should use the language prefixed one if not every language implements that?

Author: Should be now clarified in 5d50ef97fa079a33d26c36165879ee3e4f1da171

instead, but we plan to fix this inconsistency once it has been contributed upstream.

### System metrics

These metrics are usually captured using the collector running locally but in case where no collector is present, or a centralized
collector is used then the user might opt in to also collect those.

These metrics are not captured by default in order to prevent duplicated metrics when they are also captured by a collector.

TODO : add link to supported platforms and respective implementations

> TODO : add the configuration option name to enable those

Reviewer 3: Will you fill in these TODO`s before merging?

Reviewer: I think this is still a TODO for every language :sweat_smile:

Author: The goal of this PR was to bootstrap the spec, so the goal was to merge them with the TODOs and add the missing pieces later.

Author: > What do you think about `ELASTIC_OTEL_SYSTEM_METRICS_ENABLED=false|true` ?

@xrmx that looks great to me, but let's do that in a separate follow-up PR for simplicity and avoid mixing too many things.

We haven't done that recently, but the usual process involved:
- creating a "master issue" with links to the individual tasks below
- one PR for updating the spec
- one issue per platform (this is automated)

However this hasn't been used in a while since the addition of otel agents, so you might have to do this manually.

- avoid capturing potentially confusing data (see [system metrics](#system-metrics) example below).

## Configuration

Elastic OpenTelemetry distributions MAY override the default configuration.
When doing so, user-configuration should remain consistent with vanilla distribution:
- explicit user configuration SHOULD remain effective
- overriden default configuration MUST have the ability to be restored to upstream default

Elastic specific configuration items MUST be prefixed with `ELASTIC_OTEL_`.
For example, the [universal profiling integration](#universal-profiling-integration) can be enabled with `ELASTIC_OTEL_UNIVERSAL_PROFILING_INTEGRATION_ENABLED`.

Elastic and platform specific configuration items must be prefixed with `ELASTIC_OTEL_${platform}_` to be consistent with
the upstream `OTEL_${platform}_` prefix.

When introducing new features, the decision between starting with platform-specific or general namespace is made on a feature by feature case:
- feature can be aligned cross-platform even if implemented only in only one: use `ELASTIC_OTEL_` prefix, for example [System metrics](#system-metrics).

> - feature that we know will be platform-specific: use `ELASTIC_OTEL_${platform}_` prefix.

Author: I have clarified here the strategy to "favor general over platform" when we can, let me know if that's not clear enough.

The pros of this strategy:
- good for cross-platform configuration, at least to enable common features
- forces us to think about cross-platform implementation
- migrating from one platform implementation to more does not forces us to deal with supporting both general and platform config level for compatibility

downsides:
- we might have configuration at two levels for a given feature as the platform-level details will be in a different level as the general ones.

Reviewer: LGTM
